[SQUEAKING]
[RUSTLING]
[CLICKING]
LAWRENCE GUTH: OK, everyone.
So today, we're
going to learn some
of the fundamental estimates
of projection theory
for balls in the plane for
the setting of real analysis.
Two goals of the class.
The first goal is to
adapt to the techniques
that we learned last
time in finite fields, so
the double counting technique
and the Fourier technique,
to Euclidean space.
And the second goal is
to start to explore.
So there's a difference
between Euclidean space
and finite fields is
that in Euclidean space,
we have to pay attention to
how our sets are clustered.
And so the second
goal of the class
is to start to
explore clustering--
information about how
the sets are clustered
and how that comes
into the story.
OK.
So here's our setup.
We'll have x will be a
set of disjoint unit balls
in the ball of radius R squared.
OK.
So that's our set of
points or set of balls.
And then we're going to have
a set of directions called D.
So D is a finite subset of S1.
It's 1 over r separated.
So the distance between any
two points of D is at least 1
over R.
And then S which
depends on X and D
is the maximum size
of the projection.
So I look at all
the directions in D
and I project the set
X in that direction,
and I take its measure.
And the maximum of
that is called S. OK.
So projection theory, we try to
understand how these things are
related to each other.
And in this Euclidean
setting, we also
need to care about
how this set X
and how the set D are clustered.
So that's measured by this--
I guess call them
clustering functions.
So N sub X of little
r is the measures--
the most amount of X in any
ball of radius little r.
So this is the
maximum over C in R2
or of the size of x intersected
with the ball around c
of radius r.
So this measures
how x is clustered.
And we're also going to
measure how D is clustered.
So N sub D of rho is
the maximum over any--
so sigma in S1 and arc of
length rho of D intersect c.
OK.
So our big goal is in
terms of this information
and how big D is and how big X
is, what can we say about S. OK.
So we're first going to do
the double counting approach.
And the argument is, in
spirit, the same as last time.
But we'll see that when we
try to do the double counting
that we did last time, that the
N sub X function and the N sub D
function will come
into the story,
and it leads to the
following bound.
So theorem one.
I'll call it theorem
1R for the real case.
Whereas last time we had
something called theorem one,
which, when I do it again, it'll
be theorem 1F for the finite
field case, and eventually
we'll compare them.
OK.
So if we have this
setup, then the number
of directions is bounded by--
let's see.
OK.
So you'll notice that
this is not a formula
that I have memorized.
S over X times the sum
over different scales.
Sorry.
OK.
So it's a sum over
different scales,
and we often in this
class will sum over
a dyadic sequence of scales,
powers of two or whatever.
OK.
And so the formula doesn't
yet look that similar,
but the idea is the
same as last time.
And then eventually we'll
compare the formulas
and see that under certain
assumptions on this
it's actually very
similar to last time.
OK.
So the proof is to double count
a certain quantity, which we
called coincidences last time.
So the key quantity called star
is the number of B1 and B2 in X.
These are unit balls.
So remember, X is a
set of unit balls.
So these are two
of the unit balls.
And theta and D. I
guess we'll say they're
not equal to each
other, although that
won't matter as much this time.
So that pi theta of
B1 and pi theta of B2
are similar to each other.
And in this setting,
we won't count--
they don't have to
be exactly the same.
I would just like
them to overlap.
So my condition will be that
the intersection of these
is non-empty.
So that's my key quantity.
Actually, in this
setup, I'm going
to allow them to be
equal to each other.
That makes the double
counting a little easier.
And in a sense, we'll see,
it's part of what's up here.
OK.
So there's a lower bound,
which is straightforward.
The lower bound says that
this star is at least
the number of directions times
in each direction X over S
squared times S. So
in each direction,
these X different
balls have been
projected into only S slots.
So a typical slot has X
over S balls in its fiber.
And so we have this
many squared choices
to pick B1 and B2
in the same fiber.
S times.
So the lower bound is really
the same as last time.
Same as last time.
Same as the homework.
OK.
So now let's look
at the upper bound.
So I will-- for
now I'll fix B1, B2
and I'll say that the distance
between B1 and B2 is around r.
So here is my picture B1
and B2 and the distance
between them is around r.
OK.
So now I'm interested
in projections
where the projection of B1 and
the projection of B2 overlap.
And so the angles
for those projections
are in a little angular range.
The angle of the projection must
be somewhere in this range here.
So what I'll say
is let's say that v
is the direction from B1 to B2.
So v is center of
B2 minus center
of center B1 over
the norm of that.
And if pi theta of B1 intersect
pi theta B2 is not empty,
then theta must be
pretty close to v.
What I'll say is that the
angle between theta and v
is smaller than around 1 over r.
OK.
So now the number of theta so
that pi theta of B1 intersect pi
theta of B2 is not empty.
That would be bounded by,
well, the number of directions
in this little arc.
So that would be ND of 1 over r.
So we see the spacing
function of the set D
comes into play here.
OK.
So that's what happens
when we fixed B1 and B2.
And the case B1
equals B2 is allowed.
And I'll make this
slightly funny convention
that then r is one unit ball,
so the distance between them
is one.
And this is true, then.
I mean, v is not well
defined, but this condition
includes the whole range
of angles, so it's true.
So remark if B1 equals B2,
take little r equals 1.
It's slightly exceptional
but all the bounds are true.
OK.
So if we want to
upper bound star,
now we need to count the number
of choices for B1 and B2.
So now I'm interested in the
number of pairs, B1, B2, and x
with the property that
the distance from B1 to B2
is at most r.
OK.
How big is that?
Well, I have norm
of X choices for B1.
But once I choose B1, I don't
have all that many choices
for B2 because B2 has
to be close to B1.
It has to be in a little r ball.
So the number of choices
for B2 is at most NX of r.
So at this moment, the spacing
function of X comes into play.
OK.
So now we can combine
these to upper bound star.
So star is now upper bounded by
X times NX of r times ND of 1
over r.
Ah, sorry.
So star is upper bounded by
the sum over the dyadic r
of this quantity.
OK.
So let me say why.
So star is this set
of coincidences.
It's a B1 and B2 and a theta,
and for each coincidence,
I sort these coincidences
by the distance
from B1 to B2, which I call r.
So I take the coincidences where
the distance is around r and I
sum over the possible r's.
Once I fixed r, I have this many
choices for the pair B1, B2.
And once I've fixed B1 and
B2, I have this many choices
for theta.
So that's the point.
OK.
The rest is algebra.
I'll sketch it
quickly on the board,
and that'll be the
end of the proof.
And then we'll pause
to digest and check it.
OK.
So all together,
we have X squared S
inverse D is bounded
by star which
is bounded by the sum
over r dyadic of X and X
of r and D of 1 over r.
And then I just get
the D by itself.
If you move this stuff
over to the other side,
you get the formula
on the board.
OK.
So let's pause there for
questions and comments.
OK.
All right.
So I wanted to get
a sense of start
to explore this function
NX of r by looking
at a few different
examples of sets X
and writing down
what is NX of r.
It's not difficult, but having
a few different examples
in our mind will help to
orient us as we keep going.
And actually will help also
to digest this formula.
So this proof was clean.
This formula is a
little bit messy.
So after looking
at some examples,
we'll will digest this formula
and think about a situation
where it works out a
little more cleanly.
All right.
So examples for N sub X of r.
OK.
So number one, X is the one
neighborhood of a curve,
like a circle or
parabola or something.
So here's the ball of radius r.
And inside of there,
I have a nice curve.
And all along the curve I
have unit balls max X. So
if I have this set, how
many unit balls do I have
in a ball of radius little r?
That would be around r.
OK.
Do a second example.
Second example would
be very spread out.
If you imagine that these
points are positive charges that
repel each other, and they push
as far away from each other as
possible, they would arrange
themselves in something
like a lattice inside of here.
OK.
So I'll call this the well
spaced example, the most spread
out example.
So it looks like this.
So it's let's say it's a
well spaced n by n grid.
And so the distance
between neighboring balls
would be like r over N. So now
what would NX of r be like.
Well, it would be one
for quite a while.
If our radius is less than r
over N, then this would be 1.
But then eventually, as
the radius gets bigger,
it would get bigger than 1.
And at that point, it
would be its fair share
of the total number
or total size of X.
So once r is bigger
than this threshold,
every little r ball contains
the same amount of X.
And so the density of X is
like N squared over r squared.
The area of the
ball is like this.
OK.
And I'll do a third
example, which
is the points could
be very clustered.
Cluster.
So we could have N squared
unit balls in an N ball.
So the picture
would be like this.
We have our ball of radius r.
Inside of there we have a
smaller ball of radius N,
and we pack the smaller
ball with unit balls of X.
So now what is N sub X of r?
Well, it grows like
r squared until r
is as big as this N ball.
And after that, there are
only N squared balls at all
so you can make it
a little bigger.
It doesn't grow anymore.
So it caps off it N squared
if r is bigger than N.
OK.
So now I will draw some pictures
of these three functions.
You can compare them.
OK.
We'll do some pictures.
I'm going to normalize in my
pictures, I have to choose an N.
I'm going to choose N
equals r to the 1/2.
That's helpful because it
says that the total size of X
is around r in all
three examples.
It makes them a little easier
to compare with each other.
OK.
So now I'll make a graph.
Basically, I'd like to
put on this axis little r
and on this axis N
sub X of little r.
But this graph, like
many graphs in math,
looks nicer if we
use a log log plot.
So on this axis, I'm going
to put the log of little r.
And the nicest base for that is
big R. This goes from 0 to 1.
And on this axis, I'm going to
put the log of N sub X of r.
And it's natural to
use the same base.
So this goes from 0 to 1.
This could go above
one potentially,
but because the size
of X happens to be r,
we're going to stop there.
So now what do these
three examples look like.
The first example
is a straight line.
So that's example one.
The second example
grows more slowly
than the straight
line for a while.
It doesn't grow at
all for a while.
And then it grows
quickly to catch up.
So that's the second example.
It lies below the straight line.
And then the third
example grows more quickly
than the first example, and
then it reaches a certain point
and it stops growing.
So it looks like this.
And it lies above
the straight line.
OK.
So in this theory,
there turns out
to be that things that grow--
the straight line case
is an important case.
And then there's an
important distinction
between things that are below
the straight line, things that
are above the straight line.
So the straight line
case would be that N--
that the size of X
would be r to the alpha
for some alpha, and then
N sub little r of X or N
sub X of little r would
be little r to the alpha.
That would be the
straight line case.
And the below the
straight line case,
X would still be R to the alpha.
So the end point
would be the same,
but now in the middle
we're going to go below
what we had before.
So N sub X of r would be
at most r to the alpha.
OK.
So this thing here is called
a regular alpha dimensional
spacing.
And this thing is called
alpha dimensional spacing.
I'd like to make
one more definition.
I'll say that X has
Hausdorff spacing
if it has alpha dimensional
spacing for some alpha.
But another way
of saying that is
if you look at how many points
of X are in a ball of radius R
to the beta, it's bounded by
the total number of points of X
to the beta.
And this is equivalent.
This is still below
the straight line.
OK.
So over here we
have example one.
And in general,
if you have any--
if you have a submanifold
in any dimensional space,
it will behave like this.
And alpha is the dimension
of the submanifold.
Also some self-similar
Cantor set kind of fractals,
like the Cantor
set, have this kind
of spacing where alpha would
be the dimension of your Cantor
set.
That's why it's called
alpha dimensional.
And these things, this thing
called Hausdorff spacing,
I called it that because
it appears naturally
in the theory of
Hausdorff dimensions.
Yeah.
So it's maybe worth
saying briefly
that in the geometric
measure theory literature,
a lot of the stuff we're
talking about today
was originally described in
the language of Hausdorff
dimensions.
But my impression is that
that's not really that helpful.
Like, if we defined
Hausdorff dimensions,
and then we wanted
to prove things
about Hausdorff
dimensions, we would add
an extra layer of definition.
And then we'd have to check
the extra layer of definition.
But then in all the applications
that we'll talk about,
we would never use
those definitions.
We would go back to this
theorem the way it's stated now
and use that.
So I have-- a bit tentatively,
but I've come to the conclusion
that Hausdorff
dimension is not really
a helpful notion
for this subject.
And so I'm going
to leave it out.
OK.
But any questions or comments
about these different ways
that a set can be spaced.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: I'm wondering,
like in the theorem one
for the lower bound,
basically, if we
try to calculate lower
bound for V1, V2,
is this somehow r from
R1 to R2, like that,
and compare this
with the upper bound
would be the distance
from V1 and V2
that gives more information
than the inequality?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
OK.
So the question is,
when we were processing
the upper bound for
this, we sorted it
according to the distance.
So we really have
a set star sub r
where we add the condition
that the distance from V1 to V2
is around r.
And the question is if we
looked at the lower bound
we could also sort it by r,
and would that be helpful.
Yeah.
That is a good
thing to look into.
Off the top of my head, I don't
know if it would be helpful.
Our lower bound with this S here
depends on taking all of them,
but it would be interesting.
Yeah, it would be
interesting to think about.
Other questions or comments?
OK.
So let me show you.
So I claim--
OK.
It seems that this
spacing condition,
say Hausdorff spacing,
is helpful in the theory.
And one way that comes about
is that a lot of the theorem
statements become a lot cleaner
if you put in Hausdorff space.
So let's do that here.
Let's suppose that X and
D have Hausdorff spacing.
We'll use that to
simplify this thing.
OK.
So corollary one, real, is
that if we have the setup
and X and D are
Hausdorff spacing, then
we get a simpler inequality,
which matches quite well what
happens in finite fields.
Then D is bounded by S
plus X. So let me check.
OK.
So I'll prove this and
then I'll try to argue.
Actually, so OK.
So this looks a little
nicer than before.
It might still not
look that nice to you.
But I would summarize
it like this.
Either S is pretty close to
X or D is smaller than S.
And that's what we
had in finite fields.
So why is it?
If S is a lot smaller than
X, this is much less than 1,
so we can rearrange that.
And we get that
D is less than S.
OK.
So what's the proof?
Well, we're going to have an
expression like NX of r ND of 1
over r.
And so now let's suppose that
little r is big R to the beta.
And then being Hausdorff.
It tells us that NX of r to the
beta ND of r to the minus beta
there, that is bounded
by X to the beta times D
to the 1 minus beta.
That's what being
Hausdorff tells us.
So being Hausdorff allows us
to relate NX of r for any r
to the size of X, which is NX
or big R. And algebraically it
works out like this, and for
D, it works out like that.
OK.
And then by [? AM-GM, ?] this
is smaller than X plus D.
So every one of these
complicated things,
they're all bounded by X plus D.
And the number of them is only
log of r.
So OK, sorry.
So I should put a log of r here.
OK.
So now we're just going
to plug this in up there.
I'll have an X plus D up
there and a log r factor.
The X and the X plus D gives me
this, and the D and the X plus D
gives me that.
That's just algebra.
OK.
Now let's compare this
with the theorem we proved
last time in finite fields.
So theorem one in finite fields
said that if we had X in Fq2
and D in Fq and S is the maximum
theta in D size of pi theta of X
then either S is around
X or D is bounded by S.
And the numerology is now
the same in finite fields,
or if you have balls,
with the Hausdorff space.
OK.
So in general, the
numerology in a lot of things
is the same between
finite fields and balls
with Hausdorff spacing.
And so now I'll--
so this was theorem
one from last time.
I'll track through also
theorem two from last time
and the conjecture
from last time.
And we'll see that
they all match up.
OK.
So we have projection theory
in Fq2 versus unit balls in B2R
and B2R with Hausdorff space.
So here was theorem two
last time in finite fields.
So if we have our finite field
setup, which is over here,
and S is smaller than
q, then the conclusion
is that the number of directions
is smaller than Sq over X.
And here's what we'll prove
in the real case corollary 2R.
So if we have our setup
of the day and X and D are
Hausdorff and S is a
good bit smaller than R,
then maybe this needs
a little bit more.
Then D is smaller
than SR over X. OK.
So I use this symbol
with the extra tilde.
That's hiding something like a
log factor, similar to the log
factor that appeared over here.
Like, if you compare
the real case theorem
one and the finite field case,
we lost an extra log r factor.
That will happen sometimes.
So notation.
A less than some B means for
every epsilon bigger than 0,
there exists C epsilon.
So A is less than or equal to
C epsilon R to the epsilon.
But if you compare these,
q corresponds to R.
That makes sense.
There are q squared
points here and there
are r squared unit balls here.
And these basically match
up except that there's
a minor loss here.
OK.
And so this is
the Fourier method
that we'll turn to
in a little bit.
There is also a conjecture
about the sharp behavior.
So conjecture.
If p is prime and we have
our finite field setup,
and S is smaller than
the minimum of q and X.
So either of these are trivial.
S is always at most q and
it's always at most X.
So we're make it less than that,
so we're in a non-trivial range.
Then D should be
bounded by S squared
over X, which would
be sharp if it's true,
and it matches the behavior
in an integer grid.
OK.
This conjecture has
an analog over over--
in the real case.
And the real analog
is due to Furstenberg.
It's called the
Furstenberg set conjecture.
So it says if we have the setup
and X and D are Hausdorff,
and S is significantly less
than the minimum of R and X.
So again, S is always
smaller than R.
It's always smaller
than X. And we're
saying it's significantly less
than that, so it's non-trivial.
Then the number of
directions would
be less than tilde
tilde S squared over X.
And you see that these
conjectures again match up.
Cool.
OK.
Now I mentioned on
the first day that one
of the fundamental problems
of projection theory
recently had been solved.
This is the problem.
So this conjecture
has been proven.
So this is a theorem from
2024 of Orponen, Shmerkin Ren,
and Wang.
Conjecture is true.
AUDIENCE: In the first,
the plan, it is still open?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yes.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Conjecture R is true.
Finite field is still wide open.
Yes.
Cool.
So actually,
another reason I was
excited to do projection
theory this semester
is that a bunch
of the architects
of the recent developments
will be visiting.
Pablo Shmerkin is going to
be here for about a month.
He's going to talk in
the analysis seminar.
I might rope him into
talking in this class.
Kevin Ren is going to
visit and give a talk.
Hong will be here at some
point, although maybe not
during classes.
Yeah.
Let me say something
very briefly.
So these two conjectures,
I presented them
as being parallel to each other.
I think that's fair.
And they're both
quite difficult.
This one people have managed
to prove, which is exciting.
And this one is still open.
So the difference is
that in this problem,
there are many different scales.
We've seen the many different
scales in what we just
did with double counting.
We had to think about all
these different scales.
And we're going to do it
again with the Fourier method.
So far, you might
have the impression
that these different
scales are just a nuisance.
They make simple
arguments more complicated
and the expressions longer.
But actually, having these
many different scales
will turn out to be a help.
So they play a key role
in the proof of this
that, somehow, because
of all these scales,
if something goes wrong,
something has to go wrong
at many different scales.
The argument also
has different cases,
depending upon
whether the sets look
like-- set have
spacing like number one
or spacing like number two.
There are different
things to play with.
They're both helpful
in different ways.
And none of that structure
is available here,
so probably completely
different ideas would be needed.
OK.
Good.
So the second half of
the class, the goal
is to do the Fourier
method in the real case
and build up towards doing this.
Let me remind you
first of the main thing
we proved using Fourier
analysis over finite fields.
And then we'll set up a
version over the reals.
OK.
So part two of the
class, Fourier method.
OK.
So the main lemma that we proved
over finite fields is like this.
So let's say fancy L is a
set of lines in fq squared.
And f is a sum over
all these lines
of the characteristic
function of the line.
OK.
If that's true,
then we can break up
f into two pieces, a
zero frequency piece
and a non-zero frequency piece.
So then f is equal to F0
plus f-- we called it f high.
Zero frequency.
High frequency.
So the support of
f0 hat is just zero.
In other words, f0 is constant.
And we can find out exactly
what the constant is.
And based on that, we can say
that the L2 norm squared of this
is the number of lines squared.
Then the support of
the high frequency part
is the complement of zero.
And the high frequency
part has an L2 bound.
L2 squared is L times q.
OK.
I remember teaching intro
to real analysis class once,
and so I tried to answer the
question on the first day, what
is real analysis?
So there are several.
There are lots of
different things
you might say, something
about convergence and infinity
or whatever.
But another thing I proposed
is analysis is complicated
equals simple plus small.
Study something complicated.
The real analysis
point of view is
to try to write it as something
simple plus something small.
So this is our function that
maybe we feel is complicated.
We don't understand
it that well, yet.
We wrote it as something simple.
This is a constant
function, which
makes it quite simpler
than a general function.
And then this
bit-- and the point
here is that this is
smaller than f0 or f.
Now that only becomes
true, and this only
becomes at all interesting,
when the number of lines
is much bigger than q.
When that happens,
this L2 norm is
much smaller than that L2 norm.
So complicated equals
simple plus small.
OK.
So our goal is I will describe
to you the version of this lemma
over the real numbers.
OK.
So instead of a line, so an
infinitely thin line, what we're
going to talk about
is a rectangle,
or I usually call it a tube.
So capital T for tube
is a 1 by R rectangle
in the plane in any direction.
OK.
And so basically, we're going to
add up characteristic functions
of rectangles.
But when you do
Fourier analysis,
characteristic functions
of rectangles--
characteristic functions in
general are not super nice.
Because of the
discontinuous sharp cutoffs,
their Fourier transforms
are not very well behaved.
So what we often do is we work
with a smooth approximation
of the characteristic function.
So c sub t is a
smooth approximation
of the characteristic
function of t.
OK.
So another thing about this step
of doing Fourier analysis on R2
instead of finite fields is that
certain things are a little bit
messy.
For example, it's a little
bit messy to write down
the formula for c sub t.
So I'm going to try the
approach of not doing
the messy details in class.
So in class I'll
give you an overview.
And then on the homework.
I'll do all of the details,
and you can check the things
and make sure you
understand how it works.
And I do that partly
because I feel
like sometimes the messy details
obscure the main trajectory
of what we want to do.
So it's good to first
learn what you want to do,
and then, once you know
where you're trying to go,
fill in all the little
steps to get there.
So for this class, I won't
say anything more precise than
c sub t is a smooth
approximation
of the characteristic
function of t.
OK.
So now here is our main
lemma in the real case.
OK.
So instead of L is a set
of lines, t is a set of 1
by R rectangles in the plane R2.
And then f is the sum
over all the rectangles
of this smoothed
characteristic function,
and that plays the role of
the function f up there.
OK.
And then we're going to break
this function up into pieces.
There are going to
be low frequency
pieces that have the advantage
of being kind of constant.
And there are going to be some
high frequency pieces that have
the advantage of being small.
But the difference between the
real world and fq is that fq,
there are only two
kinds of frequencies.
There was zero and not zero.
But in the reals, there
are a lot of frequencies.
There's large, medium, small,
very small, and all of those,
they're each going to be there.
OK.
So instead of having two pieces,
we will have many pieces.
So f is going to be
the sum of f little r.
Little r goes from
1 up to capital R
and is dyadic, just
like in theorem one.
So we'll have log
of r many pieces.
And these are the different
scales of the frequencies.
OK.
We'll do this so that
the support of Fr hat
is contained in the ball
of radius 1 over little r.
So that's the
frequency information.
And we will say something
about the L2 norm.
OK.
Now, our bounds on the
L2 norm before only
depended on how many
lines there were,
not about how the
lines were arranged.
But that won't be
quite true anymore.
Like we've seen in
other places, it
will matter how these
tubes are clumped.
So if you have many tubes
that are clumped together
inside of a--
yeah.
OK.
So let me put the other
part of the definition.
So N sub r of T is the
maximum over T tilde, which
is like a two little
r by two big R
rectangle of the number
of T in our set of T
so that T is
contained in T tilde.
So here's a picture.
So here is T tilde.
This axis is little r
basically, and this axis
is big R, basically.
Maybe it's good
to put two big R.
And inside of here there
may be a bunch of R2's.
So just like-- oh, and I guess
to be consistent with before,
I should actually do this.
So N sub X of r measured
whether many of the balls in X
were clumped together,
and N sub T of r
measures whether many of the
tubes of T are clumped together.
OK.
So the bound will
depend on that thing.
Formula is-- OK.
N sub T of little r times the
number of tubes times little r
inverse times big R.
OK.
So you can see that I don't
remember this formula that well.
But one thing to
notice about it is
that as this number gets
bigger, then our bound for this
gets bigger.
I also claim that this tracks
with the finite field case.
So if you plug in little
r equals 1, that's
the highest frequency part.
N sub T of 1 is
going to be just 1.
If the tubes are
disjoint, then--
or the tubes are distinct, then.
Anyway.
So then if you plug
in little r equals 1,
this number will match with
the high frequency case.
And if you plug in
little r equals big R,
then this will match with
the zero frequency case.
But now we also have all
this in between stuff.
OK.
Any questions or comments
about this statement?
So I'm going to
do a proof sketch.
Proof sketch of main lemma
are details on homework two.
How's homework one going?
If you're interested, there are
office hours after class today
and after class on Thursday.
OK.
There's a Fourier
analysis proof.
And an important
character is, well, we'll
take the Fourier transform
of each of these CT hat.
And the support of CT hat is
going to be contained in T star,
where T star is
defined as follows.
It's the set of ksi in R2
so that the dot product
X1 minus X2 dot ksi has norm at
most 1 for any X1 and X2 in T.
Here's a picture.
So in X space,
here is our tube T.
And I take a couple of
points in it, X1 and X2.
So our ksi is going to
have a small dot product
with any vector like that.
And so the dimensions of
this T are-- this is 1
and this is R. OK.
Now in ksi space,
T star is going
to be perpendicular
to T. There's T star.
And it has length 1 and
width like 1 over R.
So geometrically, the idea is
that if I take my vector here,
my vector there, the long
component of this one has size R
and it gets paired with
the short component
of that one which has size 1
over R, which gives me around 1.
And the two short components--
the short component
here has size 1, which gets
paired with the long component
here, which has size 1.
OK.
And this is analogous
to the lemma
we had in the finite field case
that the characteristic function
of a line hat was
supported in the line
perp, which is like star.
OK.
So that's the first
important ingredient where
the Fourier transforms live.
And I guess you're doing
the homework now where
you're checking what
line hat looks like.
And then in the next
homework, you'll
check what CT hat
looks like, and you'll
see it supported like this.
OK.
So now I'll tell
you who f sub r is.
So let's next do--
so the f sub r comes from
Littlewood-Paley theory,
where you can take
any function and you
can break its frequencies
into dyadic pieces,
the Littlewood-Paley pieces.
That's what we're doing here.
So Littlewood-Paley
decomposition.
So I'm going to write 1 as a
sum on my dyadic little r's
of eta r of ksi.
So this is a partition of
unity in Fourier space.
It's a partition of unity,
so these are all positive.
And the support of eta r
is contained in an annulus
where the norm of ksi is at
most 1 over r and at least 1
over 10 r.
And that's true for r
strictly between 1 and r.
And at the endpoints,
we need to have
not just an annulus but
something a little bit bigger
to cover all the frequencies.
So the support of eta capital
R is contained in the ball
of radius 1 over R, and the
support of eta 1 is contained
in the set of ksi, where the
norm of ksi is bigger than 1/10.
All right.
Oh, I guess maybe
I should mention.
One thing that we see from this
is that the support of f hat
is contained in the unit
ball, because every T
star is in the unit ball.
OK.
So now I can say who fr is.
So fr is just taking f and
multiplying on the frequency
side by eta r.
So I take f hat.
I multiply it by eta r and I
take the Fourier transform back.
So this is also equal to f
convolved with eta r inverse
Fourier transform.
OK.
And because this is
a partition of unity,
that tells me that f is,
indeed, the sum over r of fr.
So we can check off
our first conclusion.
And from this formula, this
here is the Fourier transform
of fr hat.
fr hat is eta r times f hat.
And that tells us that
the support of fr hat
is contained in the
ball of radius 1 over r.
So we can check off that
part of the conclusion.
And then the difficult
and interesting part
will be to figure out the L2
norm of each of these pieces fr.
OK.
Now this operation of
localizing frequencies
to an annulus around 1 over r,
you can do it with any function,
not just with f.
So you can also do it with each
of the psi T one at a time.
So psi T comma r would
be I take psi T hat,
I multiply it by eta r, and I
take the Fourier transform back.
And so FR is the
sum over all the T
in my set of tubes of psi Tr.
OK.
So the next thing
I'd like to do is
to visualize together
this function eta r
check and this function psi Tr.
Do a visual of eta
r check and psi Tr.
OK.
So the function eta r itself,
eta r of ksi, that's around 1
on the annulus of
size 1 over little r.
So when I take its
inverse Fourier transform,
eta r check of x
will be around--
it will be around
1 over r squared
on most of x less than r.
So the biggest this
could possibly be
is integrating this would be
the area of this annulus, which
is 1 over r squared.
And then, because
this is smooth,
once I look at x's that are
significantly bigger than r,
I start to get a lot of
cancelation in the integral.
Let me write down
the formula for this.
So eta r check of x is the
integral e to the ix ksi
eta r of ksi.
So if x is smaller than r, there
is no significant cancelation
in this integral because
the ksi is around 1 over r.
But then when x
is bigger than r,
there starts to be
cancelation in this integral.
And because this is smooth, the
cancelation is quite dramatic.
So this is rapidly decaying.
x bigger.
OK, so that's what the size
of this function is like.
But also there's some
cancelation in it.
So if you integrate
this function.
Well, if you integrate
that, you get
eta r of 0, which is 0
because eta r is supported
on an annulus and not a ball.
So this function has
some cancelation in it.
It averages to 0.
OK.
So I can graph it.
Ksi sub r check is radial.
So here is the radius norm of
x and here's eta r check of x.
And it would look
something like this.
And you have to
do this carefully,
but the negative part is going
to balance the positive part
to integrate to 0.
So imagine rotating this.
And this scale here, that's r.
OK.
Now these different
exponents here
work out nicely and
a different way--
a way to describe
it is that if I
take the integral of the norm
of eta r check of x dx, well,
it's around 1 over r squared
times the area of the ball
of radius r, which is 1.
That integral is around 1.
So if I were to
take some function
and convolve it with the
absolute value of eta r
check of x, that would roughly
be the average value of f
on the ball around
x of radius r.
The weighted average is not
exactly the standard average,
but that's roughly what it is.
AUDIENCE: So is it the case
that convolution with a function
on the annu--
like, if eta r is
on the annulus,
basically behaves the same as if
it were on the ball of radius.
LAWRENCE GUTH: So the
question is, how would we
compare an eta r that's
supported on an annulus
with a similar function that
was supported on the whole ball?
Yeah.
It's mostly similar.
Because of the annulus,
there's more cancelation.
So if we did it
on the whole ball,
we wouldn't have this
integral property.
There may or may not be
a little negative part
if we did it on the whole ball.
But the negative
part would probably
would be dominated
by the positive part.
OK.
So that's what the
function eta r looks like.
And now that we
understand that, we
can understand the
function psi Tr
because psi Tr is equal to psi
T convolved with eta r check.
OK.
So the norm of psi Tr of x
is around r inverse times
the characteristic function
of a thickened tube.
So if I take the r
neighborhood of T.
So if this is T I could
take a fat neighborhood
of that that looks like this.
So that's the r
neighborhood of T.
So psi T itself is basically
supported on T, although it's
smoothed out a little bit.
And then when I take
the low frequency
part, the 1 over r frequency
part, then it gets spread out
and it gets smaller.
OK.
And it also has some
cancelation in it.
So if the graph of
this function mostly
depends on the transverse
direction, and then
it looks a lot like this.
So this would be the
transverse direction
and this would be the height.
So here I'll put
that in the picture.
So this transverse
direction maybe I'll call y.
And then we could make a
graph where here we put y,
and here we put psi Tr of y.
And we would see the same thing.
Positive.
Negative.
And this length scale here is r.
The negative part would
cancel the positive part,
because if you
convolve something
who integrates to 0
with something else,
then the whole thing
will integrate to 0.
OK.
So that's what these
functions look like.
OK.
All right.
So before I erase
this, maybe I'll say.
So we mentioned
earlier that if we
have a smooth function
supported on this tube,
we take its Fourier transform.
It's essentially supported
on this dual tube.
That proof is a
slightly fancier version
of what we were
just talking about.
So we were just
saying that if you
have a smooth function
on a certain annulus
or a certain ball, then its
Fourier transform is essentially
supported on a
dual ball and then
its rapidly decaying outside.
So this first statement is
exactly the same as that,
except that we have a
tube instead of a ball.
Having a tube instead of a ball
makes it a little-- there's
a little bit more writing
or thinking involved,
but it's the same idea.
The details will
be on the homework.
OK.
So in the finite
field case, the heart
of the argument,
the key thing called
the key lemma was an
orthogonality lemma that
said that the high frequency
parts two different lines
are orthogonal.
And something like
that is true here.
So lemma on orthogonality.
This is like the key lemma.
So it says the following.
T1 and T2 are
tubes, 1 by R tubes.
Then the psi Tr's are
usually orthogonal.
So if I take the inner product
of psi T1r with psi T2r,
it's usually really small.
R to the minus 1,000, something
that's really small compared
to everything in our proof,
unless the two tubes are quite
similar.
And the way we'll
say this is there
exists T tilde, which is just
basically a little r by big R
tube.
I'm going to magnify it
just a little bit that.
That contains them both.
T tilde and inside of here.
And they have these T1 and T2.
OK.
So we could have some
intuition about this
from our visualization
of psi Tr.
If I were to take T1 and
T2 in the same T tilde--
so this thickened
neighborhood, notice,
is basically the
same as T tilde.
If I pick T1 and T2
corresponding to the same T
tilde, then when I
thicken them both,
I get basically
the same rectangle.
And in fact, then the
functions psi T1r and psi T2r
are basically the same
function, so they are not
at all orthogonal.
And that's the only
thing that can go wrong
if the thickened neighborhoods
are disjoint or certainly
orthogonal.
And the more
interesting part is that
if the thickened neighborhoods
are transverse to each other,
they are orthogonal.
And we can check that
by Fourier analysis.
So proof sketch.
If the angle between
T1 and T2 is bigger
than maybe r to the
epsilon 1 over R--
or little r over big R,
then the support of psi
Tr hat intersected the support
of T1 of psi T2r hat is empty.
So the support of psi T1--
so this is the support
of psi T1 hat intersected
with the annulus of size
1 over r, intersected
with the support of psi T2 hat.
And these are two
rectangles that
are transverse to each other.
And so you can check the
intersection is empty.
AUDIENCE: Why does it
rule out the translation
for the rectangles if
they're [INAUDIBLE]?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
And so that's case one.
So the other case is if
the R neighborhood of T1
is disjoint from the
R neighborhood of T2
or a little bit
more than r, then
we use the formula
psi Tr is psi T1.
So then we have here
integral psi T1r,
psi T2r, complex
conjugate, is the integral
of psi T1 convolved with eta
1 and psi T2 convolved eta r
check.
And these two guys
have disjoint support.
OK.
So now we are ready to
estimate the L2 norm.
So our orthogonality lemma says
that these different psi Tr's
are usually orthogonal
with a few exceptions.
And we're going to
use that orthogonality
to estimate the L2
norm, but we have
to keep track of how many
exceptions there are.
All right.
So L2 estimate.
So the last thing we need
to check is fr L2 squared.
So fr is the sum over
all of our T of psi Tr.
L2 squared.
So that's this thing
inner product with itself.
So if I expand it
out, it's the sum T1,
T2 of the inner product
of psi T1r, psi T2r.
OK.
And the key point
is orthogonality
lemma tells us that most of
the inner products in this sum
are negligible.
There's only a few that are not.
Let me give a bit of a name
to the ones that are not.
So this scenario here,
I'm going to abbreviate it
as saying that T1
is related to T2.
T1 is close to T2.
I guess we could
put a little r here.
So this inner
product is negligible
unless T1 is related to T2.
OK.
So let's look at our big
sum of inner products.
And I'll break it
up into two parts.
It's the sum where T1 is
related to T2 inner product,
plus the rest of them.
And the rest of them are really
tiny by the orthogonality lemma,
so the rest of them
are negligible.
OK.
Now each of these inner
products, all arithmetic,
geometric mean it.
So that's less than the sum
T1 related to T2 of psi Tr L2
squared psi T1r L2 squared
plus psi T2r L2 squared.
OK.
So I want to know how many times
does each of these functions psi
T1 appear in this sum.
And the number of times is the
number of different T2's that
are related to T1.
And that number is
basically the number
that appears in our main lemma.
This thing that we
were counting here,
how many tubes lie in a
little r by big R big tube?
That's exactly how many
tubes T2 are related to T1.
So this thing.
You can say the number of T2
so that T2 is related to T1.
This is bounded by Nr
of T. So this whole sum
is bounded by Nr of T times
just the sum on all the T and T
of psi Tr L2 squared.
Cool.
And then finally, each
of these functions
we've already described.
So hopefully I didn't erase it.
Yeah.
So we described it.
It has height at r inverse, and
it's supported on a little r
by big R rectangle.
So we can compute its L2 norm.
So this is N sub T of r times
the number of tubes times
the height was r inverse.
So that's r to the
minus 2 times the--
so this is the
amplitude squared.
And this is the area
for this psi Tr.
And that was the thing that
was on the right hand side.
OK.
Let me summarize the
proof for the last minute.
Let's look back at
our statement here.
So if we look at
this sum of tubes,
we're going to break it into
different frequency pieces.
Littlewood-Paley theory.
And then the high
frequency pieces
are usually orthogonal
to each other.
If you look at two tubes and
you look at the frequency 1
over r part, they're orthogonal
to each other unless those two
tubes are in a common fat
tube, little r by big R.
And so you take advantage
of that orthogonality where
it's available and
it gives this bound.
OK.
Good.
Let's stop there for today.
We will wrap this up on
Thursday and then discuss
how similar ideas apply
in a different context
in sieve theory.
In number theory.